My first question concerns your academic
background. What took you into oceanography?
Interest, undergraduate training? Oh, I guess it
was being a kid growing up on the waterfront, and
then went off to college, and I found out they paid
people to do this kind of stuff. I didn't believe
it.
Well, having been growing up on the waterfront and
being in the commercial fisheries and I was just
kind of interested in fishing and that sort of
thing. Where did you grow up in Waterford? On North
Shore of Long Island. Obviously you weren't from
Seattle, I'm about to ask. And where did you do your
undergraduate training? University of New York.
And I ended up doing my graduate training there
too. I did one year out here in 59-60 after I got my
bachelor's degree. And I ended up going back for my
master's and PhD at Cornell.
Basically, it was more of a question of speed. I
thought I had places to go and people to see and
things to do. At that time, the graduate program
here was extremely tedious. It was taking people
seven or eight years to get out. You couldn't have
made your notionography at Cornell. Well, they
had an oceanographer there, but we were in the
College of Agriculture in the Department of
Conservation. And they had a guy there who was
primarily teaching some service courses.
But he did run a little program on Long Island.
effluent waste problem on the south shore back
when pollution wasn't even an in thing to do, but we
were working on pollution back in the late 50s and
early 60s. And this explains in your interest in
ecology. This directs you towards ecology? Yeah,
I believe so. Again, I guess I have to sort of lean
back on what I did as a kid growing up and hunting and
fishing and, you know, sort of interested in the
outdoors and it was an area I never even thought of,
you know, working at, you know, i.e. making a
living. And then I, like I said, I went off to
college and I found out they paid people to do this
kind of stuff, but I just really couldn't believe
it, you know. And, of course, that was a crazy time
when right after Sputnik went up, and it sure felt
nice to have people, you know, writing you letters
and saying, please come here, you know, we'll do
this and we'll do that for you. And so it was really
kind of a, you know, the timing was right. I don't
know what happened, you know, I would have gone
through later on, but that's the way, you know, it
was in the late 50s, early 60s. And you didn't take a
break between your undergraduate training and
your graduate training? No. You went straight
through? I went straight through. Okay. And was
the University of Washington your first job? No.
After I got my degree at Cornell, I went to Scripps,
and I worked in the TUNA group, a thing called
Scripps TUNA Oceanographic Research Group. And I
was there for about two and a half years. And I did my
thing, which was phytoplankton ecology. After
that, I went to Woods Hole for four years, doing
basically the same thing, working with John
Reiser and Dave Menzo and their group. And then I
spent two and a half years at the National Science
Foundation, leaving Woods Hole in January of 71.
left the Science Foundation. I was a staff
associate in the oceanography section in June 73,
and I came out here in June 73 and been here ever
since, still doing basically my phytoplankton
type of approach to food web ecology. With whom did
you work at Scripps now? The guy in charge of the
group was Morris Blackburn. He was a transplanted
Australian. And his old plankton type was Alan
Longhurst, who went back to England as a director
of a lab in Plymouth. And there was a
phytoplankton, another phytoplankton type by
the name of Bill Thomas. And there was four
principal, what you would call principal
investigators there, a group of maybe a total of 15
people. And we were trying to hook up the game of
phytoplankton, zooplankton into tuna with using
physical parameters also. It was sort of the ego
systems approach before they even coined the
term. We didn't do any modeling per se. Again, that
really didn't come into vogue until much later,
although our statistical analysis at
And then you, and you take this with you to Woods
Hole, this technique with you to Woods Hole, and
begin to work there. But you don't work on tuna at
Woods Hole. No, no. At tuna we, uh, the, the rye of
the group was basically, uh, looking at food chain
dynamics, uh, using a chemical approach, uh,
looking at, uh, mass balances and things like
this, rather than being overly concerned with
population dynamics, uh, the various species
compositions of the various parts of the food
chain. We used a bulk approach. We measured
carbon, nitrogen, and things like that. Now,
how did you make contact with the University of
Washington from NSF? What prompted you to make a
change for this? Well, it was sort of a question of
did I want to get back to the science or did I want to
stay in the administration? part and I thought I'd
want to go back and do the science again and two and a
half years is probably as long as you want to take
off and what all I ended up doing was I let the word
out I was looking for a job and this is the one of the
ones that came in and one of the more attractive
ones. Now, while you were at NSF, I have several
questions, one of the things I wanted to ask you
about. I have several questions, as a matter of
fact, about grant giving and getting as it occurs
on the level. It has been suggested that in terms of
creating the discipline of oceanography, that
grant getting directs the nature or the direction
of oceanography. That is, oceanographers tend to
petition the government for grants, not so much
for their own research, but to do research like the
NSF would like them to do. Is that your experience?
Oh, there's a certain amount of truth to that. You
obviously, when you're writing a proposal,
you're obviously going to write one that you think
is going to be funded, otherwise you're just
spinning your wheels.
There are certain in things, they're fads in
science just like everything else.
The nice thing about at least the Science
Foundation was that there was a number of
different offices you could go to if you had
different kinds of problems in mind.
The big programs, of course, are more directed.
Not to say that that's necessarily bad. I mean,
direction is like the NORPACS thing where they're
trying to... The end result, obviously, is to try
to predict weather so that when the IDOE office
makes up their mind they're going to go
the kinds of problems that they're willing to
fund. But the oceanography section, per se, is a
lot more open. And I think, by and large, it's
probably as open as you're ever going to get. I
believe the track record there shows that
probably 10% of the funds each year are spent on
flyers. Things that, you know, it's a good idea.
I'm not really sure it's going to pay off. probably
another 15 to 20% of the money is spent each year on
young people coming into the business. Of course,
that implies that they cut off the older guys,
which they do. But I think, by and large, the
Science Foundation, and to some extent ONR, is the
only two places in the government where you can get
money to do the kinds of things you're interested
in doing, much more so than, say, IRDA or EPA or
NOAA. what are more mission-oriented agencies.
So I think you can still do more or less what you want
to do. The thing at NSF, of course, is changing kind
of rapidly. I got in sort of at the tag end where most
of the programs were staffed by rotators like
myself. You come out of academia, you plunk into
the office for a couple years, and you knew you were
going to go back out again. And so that you would
drag along your ideas of what you thought was good
science. But we've had so much trouble recruiting
people to go to Washington, people just don't want
to go, that we're ending up filling up all the
program slots with career bureaucrats. And
that's not exactly a desirable way to go.
Well, with the reaction that we've had to the Nixon
foolishness and everything else, and also the
consumer advocacy emphasis and everything else,
we're getting stuck with a lot of accountability
jazz, which I think is really a detriment. Again, I
look back at when I was there, we could walk through
a grant in less than a day. If a guy, you know, his
kids weren't going to have any shoes, he wasn't
going to get any food, and we had to get that grant
out that day, we could walk the thing through in one
day. And there's no way that's going to happen
anymore. It has to go through so many review
boards.
They just get to be more of a bother. And I imagine
it's a heck of a lot less fun being back in the
Science Foundation now than it was when I was back
there, just because you're always on the firing
line a lot more. We used to be fairly well protected
from the bureaucrats and from Congress. But I
think Congress gets down probably even to the
division level now. Back in the old days, if I had to
quote the old days, it's not that old, but if
anybody from Congress tried to contact anybody in
the Science Foundation, there was always a
roadblock that they had to go to first, and they
couldn't get by him to get to you. They had to tell
him what they wanted, and he'd find a guy to answer,
so that you never were in direct contact. The
political punch is getting down a lot lower now
than it was back then. And of course, we're running
into all sorts of problems, again, with the
foundation, which never existed and we never
thought would exist just five years ago. And that
has to do with the reporting aspects. And so
back five, six, seven years ago, we did an awful lot
of things on good faith, on goodwill. And that's
gone. It's almost gone completely, which is
unfortunate. Because the other agencies, of
course, always had that kind of an aspect to them.
So the Science Foundation was sort of the last
stronghold of this thing. We didn't have to
theoretically convince our superiors that
science was good every year. But apparently,
they're going to have to start doing that again.
There's also a move in Washington now to combine
all of ocean grant-giving units into one large
super unit, probably the Department of Commerce.
Do you approve of that? I think that would be
disastrous. Basically, well, if it's strictly a
grant-giving arm, I think that perhaps wouldn't
be all that bad, mainly because it would be so darn
big. that the guys in one office aren't going to be
talking to the guys in the other office. So that you
don't end up with a sort of monolithic uniform
approach to the whole problem. I think even though
it's inefficient to have these separate groups
operating by themselves, I mean from an
administrative point of view they're very
inefficient. I think from a scientific point of
view it's probably pretty darn good. But I think
the real disaster would be if The major funding
comes from the same organization that has its own
in-house research capability. We see this across
the street here at PMEL, which is a NOAA lab, an ERL
lab. It's an environmental research lab. And they
do their own in-house research. And
theoretically, NOAA does extramural research
also. But as soon as a squeeze comes along, you know
who gets the pinch? We do. And of course, they keep
their money. I mean, it's disruptive enough
trying to keep your operation going from one year
to the next now. But if you ever got into the
situation where you're always being second and
third guessed by somebody else, like these people
over here are second guessed by people in Boulder,
Colorado. And of course, their bosses sit back in
Rockville, Maryland. And they really have very
little control on their life. And I hate like heck
to see us get, the academic area, get into the same
situation. So I just
think that something where they glommed
everything together in one group would be kind of
bad. The unfortunate thing is I think I see it
coming. And there are a number of things that are
probably going to swing it if it does happen. as
we're having trouble with facility ships. How do
you keep these things funded? How do you keep them
going? And I have a feeling that in the name of
efficiency, we might get crammed into some sort of
a mold. I happen to be back at the foundation when
the University National Oceanographic
Laboratory System was being talked about as if
they were going to do something.
it was a wonderful scheme if you read the whole
Stratton report and sort of an appendix on the back
they said as a matter of efficiency let's say we do
something about funding and operating ships and
of course that's the only thing that survived
everything else went out the window and so I could
see the need for running facilities driving the
whole thing and maybe something like that might
happen. The other thing, of course, that could
come out of it is that you'd end up with two or three
centers in the country and cutting everybody else
off. Again, this is
sort of a problematical thing, whether something
like this would happen. But that's always a real,
live possibility. Well, now, actually, this is
before your time, so to speak. There was a policy at
one time, particularly when ONR was first
organized, of sort of giving blanket grants to
institutions. And then the institution was
rather free to disperse the money among its
various faculty members and researchers. Would
you like to see a return to some sort of system like
that?
Well, that, of course, has, like everything else,
good and bad points. That sure smacks of the old
boys club, which
the thing they level against the funding agencies
now, I
think for the institution itself, it probably is
helpful to spread the blame, or as we called it back
in Washington, I think it was share the
responsibility, by letting somebody else in on
the decision-making process so that they can't
come and scalp you individually for making a bum
decision. No, I'm not I'm particularly keen on
seeing something like that.
Personally, I almost prefer to go up every two
years and get judged by somebody outside the
institution. I think, as you probably figured
out, or maybe you feel it yourself, that your own
academic reputation frequently is a lot better
outside of your institution than it is within the
institution. again, my experience, again,
having been at a number of these places, is that the
internal politics is dependent to such, to a large
and greater extent, on non-scientific things.
You know, do you have the right car? There's a lot of
social pressure involved in this thing. That's
why I live 18 miles away from here, to keep out of it.
And that's something I learned when I went to
Scripps, the first thing I inadvertently
happened to move about 10, 12 miles away from La
Jolla, mainly because I couldn't afford anything
closer. And that was the luckiest thing that ever
happened to me. And ever since then, I've always
done the same thing. Again, when I was at Woods
Hill, I was 13 miles from the office. When I was in
Washington, DC, I was 15 miles from the office. And
that just seems to be enough to separate your own
personal social life from the place you work at.
And that's the way I prefer to fly. But again,
getting back to your question, whether it's more
worthwhile having money administered locally or
not, I prefer to go out outside. I think I've gotten
a better shake in what is getting on to be about 13
years since I've been in the business. I think I get
a better shake on a national level than I do
internally.
Also, I think it's fairly obvious that with funds
are going to be cut, you know, for research. I think
that's a given with a combination of inflation and
falling prestige of academe because of the 1960s
partially. You know, several things are involved
in that, clearly. What about the oceans? Are they
going to fall as sharply as others, or will
oceanography be sort of the infield of the 70s, so
to speak, with ecology and food supplies and these
sorts of cliches now becoming common. Well, I
think the ecology kick has never really done
anything for us. We've never seen anything come
out of that.
I think oceanography will maintain its
reasonable fair share of funding. I don't think
we're going to suffer as drastically as other
disciplines, chemistry for instance, really
took it in the neck. High energy physics, you know,
probably because they were so visible. Part of my
job when I was back at the foundation was liaison
for the all federally funded oceanography. And I
started accumulating statistics on who was
getting what and things like this. And I was always
impressed. I always figured a small business
administration should be administering
oceanography. If you look at academic
oceanography as opposed to governmental
oceanography, where you can, at least I was in a
position where I could get real numbers on it.
We're talking $40 million a year. I mean, granted.
reckoning in my checking account type
arithmetic, that's a lot of money, but reckoning
on the federal level, it's peanuts. That's
rounding error.
I mean, sure they could wipe us out completely. I
don't think it does anything for the government to
do this to us. Again, going back to a game we were
playing at the foundation. And we had a write-up in
the budget book every year, you know, why they
should be supporting science. And again, the
amount of money was so small that I thought that we
ought to try to make a point that we're providing
some pretty good entertainment on television.
And rather than trying to cram it into the mold of
how we're going to do something wonderful for the
American people to make them materially better,
you know, their standard of living or something
like that. I thought we ought to try it on the
entertainment aspect. And I got almost up to the
front office with that before I got shot down. But
it really is a rather minor enterprise in the
United States on the academic scene. We happen to
be, in this university, we happen to be a pretty
large fraction of the grant and contract
research. In the College of Arts and Sciences,
have more bucks than all the other people in the
College of Arts and Science put together. But
there's only something like 18 institutions in
the United States really doing oceanography, of
which maybe five or six of them are major
institutions. So again, it's kind of a small
business. I don't think we'll get much from the
food aspect. That was sort of one of the reasons I
got into the business. In the early 60s, we were
going to feed the world's millions from the ocean.
And of course, the more I looked at it, the more
obvious it was going to be that we weren't going to
do this. But that doesn't mean we can't use what we
have more efficiently.
But the idea where we were just going to feed
everybody from the ocean was really kind of silly,
if you look at it. statistics it's only something
like seven percent of all the protein in the world
comes from from the oceans and we'd have to get you
know a hundred times as much as we're getting out or
really make a much of a dent you know as far as total
population is concerned a number of times i was
asked to make recommendations on on this sort of
thing uh My feeling was that we'd be better off
giving a guy a desalinization plant and a bag of
fertilizer and a bag of seed and tell him to go out in
the desert somewhere. And as far as increasing
food production goes, that was a more direct
approach to the whole problem, rather than some of
the things we've done in the ocean. I think one of
them, well, in the United States anyway, one of the
biggest problems is food preference. Having
worked in commercial fishing It was a part owner of
a fishing boat at one time. We used to throw away
more than we'd bring home because we couldn't
market it. It wasn't worthwhile hauling it 20
miles in, put it on the dock, because it would never
pay for the fuel that it took to haul it. So we used to
just throw it all back. So maybe in some respects,
you know, maybe the Russians ought to come over
here and catch the stuff, because they don't throw
anything back. They make it into fish meal or
something like that. They make a more efficient
utilization of the resource that they catch, as
opposed to the American fishing industry. I'm not
quite sure whether the American fishing industry
would stand still for making it more efficient. I
mean, I think it's fairly clear that if we're going
to get more protein from the ocean, we're just
going to have to do it more effectively and not
throw the stuff back. And when you start talking
about capitalization to do this kind of thing, you
don't find any large fraction of the U.S. populace
with the dollars that's willing to do this.
Maybe, you know, maybe you've got to go to some sort
of subsidized sort of an operation where they
build factory ships and you've got to increase the
size of the vessels and American seamen don't want
to go to sea for the times that it really takes to
effectively fish. They can make almost as much
money pumping gas. Why should they go to sea for 90
or 180 days at a clip? I think, well, that gets into
the whole merchant marine aspect too, but I was
saying before I was down at this Polish fisheries
research vessel here in town, and these guys are
away from home for 200 days a year, the scientists
included. When the ship leaves, it's got a full
complement with it, and they might change the
whole complement 200 days down the line or 250 days
down the line, and then the guys get three months
off or something like this. But you don't find very
many Americans doing that sort of a game. I think we
sort of wandered off. No, we're still fine.
Whatever the question was. Well, my next
question, you partially answered it. Are you very
optimistic, given your line of work, about
mariculture and aquaculture?
Well, the problem with aquaculture is that it's
primarily a labor-intensive type of a thing. And
given the standard of living, that we have in this
country. We have problems getting people
to do that kind of work. The reason the Japanese can
do it, and I don't know how much longer they'll be
able to do it, is that their standard of living is
increasing rapidly and they might price
themselves out of the market too.
The only thing I can see coming out of aquaculture
is luxury food items. I don't see it coming, you
know, a mainstay for protein supplements or
anything like that. But we have a number of
operations in this country here that are almost
breaking even, or some of them are even making
money. And there was one operation on Long Island
that was making money, but that's because they
were running ads in the New Yorker magazine and
they were selling their clams or oysters, I forget
what they were growing, as some sort of
ecologically desirable way of doing it. So, I
mean, they were selling their products to sort of
an elite group of people who were, you know, I guess
they were environmentally aware or something
like this, and it made them feel good to be able to
eat these clams that came from this plant that was
doing the right sort of thing according to their
way of thinking. But I'm sure they were paying two
times as much, two to three times as much for their
clams if they went down to a local fishing store or a
fishing market and buy it. I think the same is true
for, well, if you look at what they're trying to
produce in agriculture in the United States, it's
salmon, trout, oysters, lobsters. And if you've
been to a grocery store lately, these aren't your
protein backstays. The price of them is such that
you can't afford to supplement your diet. It's not
a supplement. You have to supplement your diet
with soybeans if you buy lobsters. And I like
lobsters too, but at the price lobsters are going,
I'd buy some red meat. No,
I don't think aquaculture is, well, I think
aquaculture is a viable business as a commercial
enterprise, but I don't see it as being a
tremendous boon to take protein from the marine
area. Of course, the other real problem that they
run into is that they're in, They're always in the
coastal zones, which are the first ones that get
the pollution impacts. And so you have, like,
Catch 23 or whatever number you want to take. John
Ryder has been growing
oysters. I can see he's grown clams, sandworms,
and kelp in some sort of a system he has at Woods
Hole, utilizing human sewage. And it's a very
efficient system. system when you get to the
outfall of the system you got clean water that's
because everything was kept by the guys on the
inside but EPA says you can't use that for human
consumption so you know what you're sort of stuck
you know here we've got a combination organic
matter production area sewage cleanup area all at
once but then what do you do with the biological
material you have between the input pipe in the
outfall. I guess you can load it on a barge and take
it out to sea and dump it, but that doesn't do you
much. That seems to be one of the problems.